+++
date = "2016-01-06"
draft = false
weight = 03
title = "Lab 03 - Getting Help"
+++

### Lab Objective

The objective of this lab is to introduce the `man` command and how it is used.

#### 1. RTFM

`man` is hard to get into the habit of using consistently.  Even as a person who uses unix-like systems every day I find myself using google to look for flags, example use-cases, and command descriptions.  This isn't inherently bad, but all of this information is usually a single command away.

On your Macbooks open up the terminal application.  When you see the style below this means you will either be inputting commands (if you see a promot) or editing a text file (no prompt).

  `$` `man`

  `$` `man -h`

  `$` `man man`

  > Manual pages use `less` to display the text contents.  You can scroll with the [up], [down] and [enter] keys.  Type `/` to search for a sequence of caracters followed by the [enter] key.

  `:/man`

  > [n] key will take you to the next occurrence of the searched for term.
 
  > the [q] key will quit

  `:q`

> What does the -k flag do?

For each command we will use in subsequent labs we will first start by reading the man page.  Even if you are familiar with the command, take a few seconds to skim the man page.  Take the opportunity to look for something you did not already know.

#### 2. Builtin Help

Some commands are built in to the shell environment (they do not require a separate process to run).  In order to read the help for these commands we can run the help command followed by the command

  `$` `help cd`

#### 3. Bonus

* Open a manpage in pdf form (OS X):

    `$` `man -t man | open -f -a Preview`

* Open a manpage in the Chrome (OS X):

    `$` `export PAGER="col -b | open -a /Applications/Google\ Chrome.app -f"`

* Open a manpage in the Safari (OS X):

    `$` `export PAGER="col -b  | open -a /Applications/Safari.app -f"`


