+++
date = "2016-01-06"
draft = false
weight = 04
title = "Lab 04 - Directory Navigation"
+++

### Lab Objective

The objective of this lab is to introduce file system navigation via the unix command line

#### 1. Working Directory

A command line interpreter runs all of the provided commands within the context of the OS file system.  Sometime this directory is displayed in the prompt but this is not required.  

0. Read the pwd man page

    `$` `man pwd`

0. Run the `pwd` command
    
    `$` `pwd`

#### 2. Listing directory contents

Knowing where you are is only half the battle.  Navigating the filesystem also requires the ability to 'list' the contents of a directory.

0. Read the `ls` man page

    `$` `man ls`
    
    > Notice the very long list of options (flags) available.  Any you didn't know about before?

0. List the current working directories files
    
    `$` `ls`
    
    `$` `ls -1`

#### 2. Making folders

0. Read the `mkdir` man page

    `$` `man mkdir`

0. Make two directories inside each other

    `$` `mkdir firstlevel`
    
    `$` `mkdir firstlevel/secondlevel`

0. Listing directories is also not limited to the current directory.  

    `$` `ls firstlevel`

    `$` `ls firstlevel/secondlevel`


#### 3. Changing directories

In order to change the working directory we can 'change directories' into another folder

0. Read the `cd` help page (cd is a builtin command)

    `$` `help cd`

    > What does cdable_vars mean?

    > How can I change to an optional destination?

    > If cd is run without a target dir where do you go?

    > If you `cd` to each of these, what directory do you go to?

      * `.`
      * `..`
      * `~`
      * `-` 

#### 3. Bonus: pushd and popd

  ```
  $ help pushd
  $ help popd
  $ help dirs
  $ cd ~
  $ pushd firstlevel
  $ pushd secondlevel
  $ popd
  $ ls
  $ popd
  $ ls
  ```


  
